today we're diving into the turbulent
Waters of the U.S debt ceiling crisis
and the ripple effect on the economy
jobs the stock market you are seeing
this going on right now today but it's
not the first time this has happened
many times before in fact so I thought I
would give you a little bit of
information as to the different events
that occurred and then what was the
impact of that so that you can have an
idea of not just this time but all the
future instances which we know are going
to happen and how bad it can actually be
my name is David Queen Theory and what I
do here is take the complex and make it
real simple all that I ask is that you
share this video if you found it
informative and let's begin let's take a
look right here first things first the
US that ceiling has been a key player in
political standoffs throughout recent
history let's take a look at some of the
most significant battles and the Fallout
from each so we're going to go back to
1990 596 the Gingrich Clinton standoff
so in 95-96 we saw the first significant
debt ceiling crisis Speaker of the House
Newt Gingrich he threatened not to raise
the debt ceiling if he had gone through
with it the U.S would have defaulted on
its debt instead we saw a series of
government shutdowns furloughing nearly
a million federal employees and
resulting in significant stock market
drops so that could happen these are the
instances we have seen before and of
course if this back and forth and in the
end what happens they spend more money
2011 the Obama era debt crisis so we're
going to fast forward to 2011.
Republicans demanded major spending cuts
in exchange for a debt ceiling increase
the resulting budget Control Act of 2011
introduced sequestration
automatic spending cuts this move
coupled with the uncertainty of the
crisis led the SMP standard reporters to
downgrade the United States credit
rating for the first time ever and as a
result the stock market plunged you look
at the stock market right now it's
performing extremely well of course
there's a few names that are doing
exceptional but at the same time if we
look at it overall broad index if you're
investing in an ETF of broad index
you're almost back to where you were at
the peak of course that doesn't factor
in inflation and time and so on but it's
performed very well considering that the
issue haven't been resolved okay now we
go to 2013 the Obamacare standoff 2013
brought in The Showdown over Obamacare
Republicans wanted to defund it in
exchange for a debt ceiling increase
eventually a compromise was reached but
not before a 16-day government shutdown
that put 800 000 federal employees
temporarily out of work and shaved a
significant percentage off of the
economic growth that order
so again here we have it shutdown
actually does happen it's temporary
people temporarily don't have work and
then everything gets put back to where
it was
2017 well in 2017 Trump signed a bill
suspending the debt ceiling until 2019
later extending to 2021. this move
though temporarily Stephen off the
crisis contributed to a sharp rise in
the national debt it doesn't matter what
what situation there's always going to
be more debt okay that is a fact so what
we could have is this temporary delay
but we don't know until it happens and
we know that the next time this comes
around we're going to experience the
same thing we're going to be talking
about the same issues so we could have
temporary instances of this being pushed
back or it could be a showdown that
lasts a matter of days or weeks and then
during that time they have to go back
and forth and eventually a deal is
reached 2021 that's the most recent one
well in 2021 the suspension ended amidst
economic recovery from the shutdowns and
lockdowns of everything of 2020. and
this sparked widespread concern about
the impacts on a already fragile economy
affecting everything from investor
confidence to potential impacts on
interest rates so here we have it
another debt crisis that's going on here
history has shown these disputes are not
just political theater they can have
very real consequences for the economy
John jobs and of course Financial
stability it's essential to stay
informed and understand the stakes
so you see that this has happened time
and time again people need to realize
that it's generally going to be
temporary some people could eventually
lose their jobs hopefully just
temporarily but we'll know that they're
going to spend more money it's just a
matter of where that money is going to
if you found this informative what I ask
of you is that you share this on who
needs to know this information share
that Facebook Twitter Youtube hit that
thumbs up just to be another way to kind
of tell the algorithm let's get this
video out there and of course I'll see
you tomorrow take care